MESSAGE

Prime Minister / Chairman, Planning Commission of Pakistan

I am glad to see this updated ‘Manual for Development Projects’ and to know that Planning Commission of Pakistan is effectively fulfilling its obligations and additional responsibilities mandated to it through Public Finance Management Act, 2019. I expect that this initiative of business process re-engineering will improve efficiency and effectiveness of public sector development program and introduce automation in the project management.

It will be beginning of a new era in public sector project processing which will ensure that the projects are completed on time and within a budget in order to accrue full benefits from the project to its beneficiaries and end users. I would urge that the Manual for Development Projects should lead to meeting the targets of the Government in service delivery and expectations of the people of Pakistan.

I would like to appreciate and congratulate Asad Umar, Federal Minister for Planning, Development and Special Initiatives and his team in Planning Commission of Pakistan under stewardship of Muhammad Jehanzeb Khan, Deputy Chairman Planning Commission for this excellent work.

(Imran Khan)

MESSAGE

FEDERAL MINISTER FOR PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT AND SPECIAL INITIATIVES

I am pleased that the ‘Manual for Development Projects’ has now been updated with new and simplified information to resolve issues faced by the sponsoring and executing agencies in the processing of development projects. It is envisaged that it will facilitate all the stakeholders involved in the planning and execution of development projects, in accordance with the provisions and requirements of Public Finance Management Act, 2019.

I would like to acknowledge the dedication and earnest efforts of my team members in the Planning Commission / Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives who were involved in the preparation of this Manual. The valuable support and input of the Asian Development Bank and UNDP also merit appreciation.

I must acknowledge the continued patronage and support of Honourable Prime Minister, Mr. Imran Khan, who is also the chairman of the Planning Commission in all the endeavours of the Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives to ensure efficient utilization of the development budget. This Manual for Development Projects will go a long way in achieving the objective of effective and efficient spending of public sector development funds in the greater benefit of the people of Pakistan.

(Asad Umar)

PREFACE

DEPUTY CHAIRMAN PLANNING COMMISSION

Over the last few years, planning process at the federal and provincial levels has undergone a transformation with new planning imperatives such as Public Private Partnership (PPP) and Results Based Management (RBM). The last Manual for Development Projects was issued by the Planning Commission of Pakistan in 1997. After a lapse of more than two decades and introduction of 18th Amendment in the Constitution of Pakistan, there was a clear need to revise the manual and develop a document that is up-to-date and provides hands-on guidance to the stakeholders.


The Planning Commission took up the ambitious task of revising the existing Manual for Development Projects. This has been updated as a guiding document for all the stakeholders in the overall management including identification, preparation, appraisal, approval, funding, implementation and monitoring & evaluation of their development projects.


One of the core objectives of the project reforms process is to achieve maximum efficiency, ultimately ensuring effectiveness and proper utilization of funds so that project outputs and outcomes are duly achieved. The Manual enables this by simplifying the processes. It is an all-inclusive document with comprehensive guidelines to help in improving understanding and efficacy for project implementation in the public sector. Planning Commission shall conduct a series of workshops to help the stakeholders adopt and implement the updated manual effectively and efficiently.


I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the team that worked for the updation of this important document, under the leadership of Mr. Abdul Aziz Uqaili, the incumbent Secretary and Mr. Hamed Yaqoob Sheikh, former Secretary, M/o Planning, Development & Special Initiatives.


Planning Commission is grateful to Mr. Asad Umar, Federal Minister for Planning, Development & Special Initiatives, for the patronage and guidance extended by him for this crucial exercise.


(Mohammad Jehanzeb Khan)

FOREWORD

SECRETARY MINISTRY OF PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT AND SPECIAL INITIATIVES


Planning Commission is continuously striving to improve the pace of development in the country. This updated ‘Manual for Development Projects’ is another endeavour in this direction. The last edition of the Manual was prepared in 1997, followed by the Guidelines for Project Management, which were published in 2008. During a span of over 12 years, numerous changes were introduced in the processes and procedures of development projects, and this warranted fresh documentation.


The Manual comprises of two volumes, the first volume gives the processes while the second one is a compendium of the rules, procedures, and instructions – issued by the Government of Pakistan, Planning Commission/Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives in different periods – for effectively managing development portfolios.


I sincerely appreciate all my colleagues, particularly the committee entrusted with this responsibility, for their hard work and efforts in completing this important national assignment. In particular, I would like to acknowledge Mr. Hamed Yaqoob Sheikh, former Secretary, Planning, Development and Special Initiatives, who was instrumental in resurrecting the publication of this Manual and significantly improving its text and format. Beside, the contribution of Mr. Naveed Iftikhar, consultant who played a vital role in compilation of the document.


This Manual has been designed as a live document, and the Planning Commission shall strive to update it regularly. Valuable feedback and suggestions from the Ministries, development partners and key stakeholders for improvement in this document are welcome.


(Abdul Aziz Uqaili)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

CHIEF EMPLOYMENT & RESEARCH


I am dearly obliged to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission of Pakistan for trusting me and providing an opportunity to contribute to update and finalize Manual for Development Projects and to incorporate the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2019 and the Simplification of Development Process. The last edition of the Development Manual was prepared in 1997, followed by the Guidelines for Project Management, which were published in 2008.


I express my special thanks and gratitude to all members of Planning Commission, officers and staff of Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives and appreciate their support and efforts for finalization of Development Manual. The input of the Committee, which initiated the task in 2017, comprising of Chiefs of PIA, PIP, Economic Appraisal, Governance Sections, DG, PPMI and Deputy Director, Project Wing under the convenorship of Advisor (DB) is acknowledged. I am thankful to all stakeholders for review, time and again, and providing valuable suggestions for its improvement. The efforts of the following Officers is acknowledged and admired without which it would have not been possible for me to finalize this Manual under the day to day guidance of the Secretary, Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives.


Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Raja, JCE (OPS), Mr. Muhammad Anwar Ch., Sr. Chief (Tech), Sheikh Muhammad Asif, Advisor (DB), Dr. Muhammad Afzal, Advisor (DP), Mr. Saleem Khattak,
 x-Chief (EA), Mr. Javed Sikandar, Chief (Gov.), Mr. Sohail Hanif, Chief (PIP), Hafiz Shahid Abbas, Chief (PIA), Dr. Muhammad Ali Noor, DG (PPMI), Dr. Muhammad Saleem Mohsin,
Deputy Chief (PC), Dr. Atiyab Sultan, Asstt. Director (CIRC), Ms. Sehar Mannoo, SO to Secretary, Mr. Zeeshan Inam, Asstt. Chief (E&R), Ms. Aiman Amjad, RO (MP&FP) and Dr. Farhan Ch. Designer.


I am also thankful to others development partners for their input especially, ADB and UNDP for their Technical Assistance. I am, in all my humbleness, grateful to all those who have helped to give different ideas to make this Manual for Development Projects simplified and user-friendly. Their input is hereby acknowledged from depths of my heart.


(Shahid Zia Cheema)
Islamabad, 29th December, 2021


TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE PART-I OF GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN

GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN
PLANNING COMMISSION
MINISTRY OF PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT & SPECIAL INITIATIVES
(EMPLOYMENT & RESEARCH SECTION)


Islamabad, the 29th December, 2021


Notification
			
To
The Manager,
Pakistan Printing Press,
University Road,
Karachi.


Subject:
UPDATED MANUAL FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS

    No. 7(239) E&R/PD & SI/21. In accordance with Section 14 (1) of Public Finance Management Act, 2019, Planning Commission of Pakistan has defined and updated processes, procedures and templates for project management in Public sector after intensive consultation with Provinces, regions, ministries, divisions and other key stakeholders, to help improve overall project management of the development projects, as Manual for Development Projects.


2.   The Manual for Development Projects is an all-inclusive document with comprehensive directions to help improve understanding, efficiency and efficacy of project management including identification, preparation, appraisal, approval, funding, implementation, and monitoring & evaluation etc. It is hereby notified for compliance with immediate effect. Its non-compliance shall be taken as audit objection. Provincial Governments, Regions, all Ministries, Divisions and attached Departments, Autonomous Bodies and Corporations are requested to follow the Processes, Procedures, instructions, guidelines and Templates, in letter and spirit.


3.   The planning commission has approved Manual for Development Projects in its meeting held on 19th November, 2021. This issues with the approval of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission of Pakistan. Soft copy is available at the website (www.pc.gov.pk) of M/o PD & SI.
							
									
(Shahid Zia Cheema)
Chief (E & R)
Tel: 051-9245075


A.   Copy for information and necessary action to:


1. Chairman, Planning & Development Board, Government of the Punjab, Lahore.

2. Chairman, Planning & Development Board, Government of Sindh, Karachi.
3. Additional Chief Secretary (Dev), Planning & Development Department, Government of Balochistan, Quetta.
4. Additional Chief Secretary (Dev), Planning & Development Department, Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar.
5. Additional Chief Secretary (Dev), Planning & Development Department, Government of AJ&K, Muzaffarabad.
6. Secretary, Planning & Development Department, Government of Gilgit-Baltistan, Gilgit.

B.  Copy for information and necessary action to:

1. All Secretaries/Additional Secretaries (In charge) of Ministries/Divisions, Government of Pakistan.
2. All Heads of attached departments/autonomous Bodies /Corporations, of Government of Pakistan.
3. Auditor General of Pakistan, Islamabad
4. Accountant General of Pakistan Revenue, Islamabad
5. Controller General of Accounts of Pakistan, Islamabad

C. Copy also to:

1. Minister, PD & SI, Islamabad.
2. Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, Islamabad.
3. Secretary to the President, President Secretariat (Public), Islamabad
4. Secretary to Prime Minister, Prime Minister’s Office, Islamabad.
5. Secretary, M/o PD & SI, Islamabad.
6. Chief Economist, Planning Commission, Islamabad
7. All Members of Planning Commission, Islamabad
8. Additional Secretary A&O, M/o PD & SI, Islamabad.
9. Additional Secretary (Dev. & SI), M/o PD & SI, Islamabad.
10. Advisor (DP), M/o PD & SI, Islamabad.
11. JCE (EP), JCE Operation, Sr. Chief (Tech/PP&H), Planning Commission, Islamabad.
12. All Sr. Joint Secretaries, M/o PD & SI, Islamabad.
13. All Joint Secretaries, M/o PD & SI, Islamabad.
14. All Chiefs/Deputy Chief (In-charge) / Head of Technical & Economic Sections, Planning Commission, Islamabad.

